# Dependencies

- gcc, ar
- diff
- GNU make
- NASM
- SPIM

## Details

GCC is used to compile the TinyScheme interpreter which is used to
bootstrap the project, which is written in C. A custom version of the
TinyScheme interpreter source is included as part of this
codebase. TinyScheme was set up for many platforms/compilers so it
should be fairly easy to replace this with other compilers.

GCC is also used to compile some minimal runtime library functions
written in C. These pieces may eventually be replaced with
assembly. Again, it should be relatively simple to replace GCC for this purpose.

NASM is used to assemble x86 code files generated by the backend,
producing object code output (`.o`, `.obj`). The backend produces x86
assembly code in a format that is somewhat specific to NASM, so it may
be more difficult to replace this component with a different assembler
(e.g. GAS).

The archiver tool (ar) is used during the build process to group
object code files into lib files. It should be straightforward to
replace this with any appropriate library tool.

Finally GCC is used as a linker for the object code and lib files to
produce the final exe. It should be straightforward to use other
linker tools for this purpose.

The project is currently tested and developed on a Windows machine
using the MinGW port of gcc, ar and make. Testing and supporting other
platforms (Linux) and compilers (clang) is planned and/or in progress.

SPIM is used as a testbed tool for verifying that the MIPS backend is
working, but this is not a required dependency to bootstrap the
compiler on an x86 machine.

## Tested Dependency Versions on Windows

The project is tested with these versions of the dependency
components. Replacing these components or picking up new versions may
require some tweaks to the project.

    >ver
    Microsoft Windows [Version 10.0.17763.253]

    >make --version
    GNU Make 3.82.90
    Built for i686-pc-mingw32

    >gcc --version
    gcc (GCC) 5.3.0

    >ar --version
    GNU ar (GNU Binutils) 2.25.1

    >diff --version
    diff (GNU diffutils) 3.6

    >nasm -version
    NASM version 2.12.02 compiled on Jul  6 2016


See [MinGW](http://mingw.org/) for native Windows builds of the GNU
tools, including make, gcc, and ar, and diff. MSYS is a component of
the Windows port of Git, so also check the usr\bin directory of the
Git install for some tools, including diff.

See [NASM](https://www.nasm.us/) for The Netwide Assembler.
